UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
Computing and Financial Management
School of Accounting and Finance
CFM 101 - Introduction to Financial Data Analytics
Fall 2024
Instructor:
Prof. James Thompson
Ofﬁce:
HH 289D
Ofﬁce hours:
TBA and by appointment
Email:
james@uwaterloo.ca
Course web page:
Access via LEARN
Lectures:
Section 001
MW 1:00 p.m. to 2:20 p.m.
HH 1102
Prerequisite:
Computing and Financial Management Students only
Antirequisite:
AFM 121, COMM 101
Text:
S. Cleary S, Canadian Securities Exam: Fast Track Study Guide
(Third Edition), Wiley, 2009 (digital version available for free)
Course evaluation:
Assignment #1
Sept 23 at 9am
5%
Assignment #2
Oct 11 at 9am*
7%
(*accepted until Oct 14 at 9am without penalty)
Assignment #3
Nov 4 at 9am
7%
Group Assignment
Nov 23 at 9am
16%
Midterm Exam
Oct 22 at 7pm-8:30pm, Location TBA
15% or 20%, see note below
Final Exam
Timing and Location TBA
40% or 35%, see note below
Classroom/Online contribution
10%
Important Notes:
1. Your overall exam grade will be calculated as follows max{(15% Midterm,40% Final),(20% Midterm,35% Final)}. Thus,
if you perform well on the midterm, it will be worth more, if you perform poorly, weight will be shifted to the ﬁnal.
2. Assignments will not be accepted after the due date and time. Please leave yourself plenty of time to submit.
3. In the (hopefully extremely unlikely) event that in-person learning is prohibited (either temporarily or for the remainder
of the semester), all in-person students will immediately switch to online. The midterm and ﬁnal will switch to remote
writing, and all assignments will proceed unaffected. Classroom/Online contribution will continue if we switch to fully
online. It is advisable that students do not wait until later in the semester to start contributing to our class.
4. The grade I assign for your classroom/online contribution is a careful, but subjective (on my part) assessment of the
value of your input to the classroom learning over the whole course. This contribution includes the following interrelated
aspects of your input.
Attendance & Punctuality. The following applies regardless if you are taking the course in-person or online. You may
have isolated occasions where you unavoidably miss a class. This is acceptable. If the occasion is foreseeable, a brief
explanatory email to me before class is polite and expected. Otherwise, a brief explanatory email to me after class is next
best. You are responsible for catching up on missed material. This requires more than just reading the notes. You are
strongly advised to ﬁnd a trusted colleague who will help you understand what was covered in class. Repeated absences,
particularly absences without notiﬁcation or unjustiﬁed absences, may have a negative impact on your class contribution
grade.
Class Preparation. You are expected to be ready for class having already read any assigned materials, attempted any
questions assigned, and prepared with your own questions.
Class oral contribution. This involves making a meaningful contribution to the learning of the class, whether you are
attending in person or synchronously online. This can be achieved in many ways, including: i) answering direct questions
posed to the class ii) participating in class discussions on issues we are addressing iii) raising questions or comments that

CFM 101
Fall 2023
help the class better understand the issues or gain a different perspective on material covered. Note that due do the class
size, everyone is not expected to participate every class (nor would this be possible).
Listening to others and respecting their points of view is an essential part of engaging in class.
Emphasis will be placed on the quality of contribution.
Additional Venues to earn Classroom Contribution Grades. Your classroom contribution grade can also be helped by
contributing to tutorials, and by thoughtfully contributing to our online discussion site, Piazza.
5. Assigned chapter readings will reinforce the material covered in class. The most difﬁcult and important topics will be
covered in class, but time constraints do not permit coverage of all topics at the same level of detail. However, you are
responsible for all assigned chapter readings regardless of whether the material has been covered in class. You are also
responsible for topics not in the text but covered in the lectures (see class schedule for more information).
6. SAF Process for Requesting Accommodation for Missed Assessments: UW’s policy regarding requests for accommo-
dation can be found at http://ugradcalendar.uwaterloo.ca/page/Acad-Regs-Accommodations.
Please note that SAF policy/practices are meant to be consistent with this.
Required supporting documentation is uploaded within the Request for Academic Accommodation web form (Accommo-
dations for illness or extenuating circumstances https://uwaterloo.ca/arts/undergraduate/student-support/
academic-considerations-and-accommodations-illness-or#submit-other). Submissions must
be complete and accurate. Please refer to the web form for links and additional information regarding the illness doc-
umentation requirements and process. The web form is regularly updated to guide students in making requests for
accommodation as processes change.
The university identiﬁes acceptable grounds for being excused from a course expectation and it is very limited. Accord-
ingly, students must understand that when accommodation is granted, it will typically be on a limited basis. For other
requests for accommodations that do not ﬁt within the explicitly identiﬁed university identiﬁed grounds, (e.g., death of
a family member), appropriate documentation should still be provided within a reasonable time period to your course
instructor or a SAF advisor (as directed). *CFM students only: you can begin by consulting the CFM advisor. The SAF
Administrative Coordinator and Advisor may co-ordinate the review of accommodation requests that do not ﬁt the within
the broader Veriﬁcation of Illness process. SAF will maintain a record of missed exams by student (name, ID ), so that
unusual situations can be identiﬁed and addressed.
If you believe you experience extenuating circumstances which have affected your academic record, you may wish to
speak with your academic advisor. Do NOT wait until the end of the term once ﬁnal grades are in. The sooner you let
someone know that there are ongoing circumstances, typically the easier it is for you to document, exhibit necessary
proactivity and timeliness and, in some cases, there may be more options available than if you leave to the end of a term.
The University of Waterloo INC grade process will be followed, where all course requirements are not completed during
the term.
Note: For all valid missed assessments, the weight will be transferred to the ﬁnal exam.
7. Requests for re-grading of the Exam/test must be made within one week after it has been given back and must be in
writing. Note that the instructor reserves the right to re-grade the entire exam, and raise or lower the grade originally
assigned. This is important as “shopping” for a higher grade is a bad strategy and has, in the past, resulted in lower
grades.
8. The ﬁnal Exam/test will be comprehensive.
9. Note on avoidance of academic offences: All students registered in the courses of the Faculty of Arts are expected to
know what constitutes an academic offence, to avoid committing academic offences, and to take responsibility for their
academic actions. When the commission of an offence is established, disciplinary penalties will be imposed in accord
with Policy #71 (Student Academic Discipline). For information on categories of offences and types of penalties, students
are directed to consult Policy #71
(https://uwaterloo.ca/secretariat/policies-procedures-guidelines/policy-71). If you
need help in learning what constitutes an academic offence; how to avoid offences such as plagiarism, cheating, and
double submission; how to follow appropriate rules with respect to “group work” and collaboration; or if you need
clariﬁcation of aspects of the discipline policy, ask your TA and/or your course instructor for guidance. Other resources
regarding the discipline policy are your academic advisor and the Undergraduate Associate Dean. Students who believe
that they have been wrongfully or unjustly penalized have the right to grieve; refer to Policy #70, Student Grievance,
https://uwaterloo.ca/secretariat/policies-procedures-guidelines/policy-70.

CFM 101
Fall 2023
10. Generative artiﬁcial intelligence (GenAI) trained using large language models (LLM) or other methods to produce text,
images, music, or code, like Chat GPT, DALL-E, or GitHub CoPilot, may be used in this course for assignments with
proper documentation, citation, and acknowledgement. Permitted uses of and expectations for using GenAI will be dis-
cussed in class and outlined on assignment instructions. Recommendations for how to cite generative AI in student work
at the University of Waterloo may be found through the Library:
https://subjectguides.uwaterloo.ca/chatgpt_generative_ai. Please be aware that generative AI
is known to falsify references to other work and may fabricate facts and inaccurately express ideas. GenAI generates
content based on the input of other human authors and may therefore contain inaccuracies or reﬂect biases. In addition,
you should be aware that the legal/copyright status of generative AI inputs and outputs is unclear. Exercise caution when
using large portions of content from AI sources, especially images. More information is available from the Copyright
Advisory Committee:
https://uwaterloo.ca/copyright-at-waterloo/teaching/generative-artificial-intelligence
You are accountable for the content and accuracy of all work you submit in this class, including any supported by gener-
ative AI.
11. For Assignments and exams. You will provide both code as well as output. The output must be produced from the code.
Output that is not produced by the provided code is indicative of an academic offence. You need to be careful. Any
time you change your code, you must re-generate your output. Failure to do so will lead to an academic dishonesty
investigation.
12. Note for students with disabilities: The Ofﬁce for Persons with Disabilities (OPD), located in Needles Hall, Room 1132,
collaborates with all academic departments to arrange appropriate accommodations for students with disabilities without
compromising the academic integrity of the curriculum. If you require academic accommodations to lessen the impact
of your disability, please register with the OPD at the beginning of each academic term.
Course Description
This course is an introduction to ﬁnance for Computing and Financial Management Students. Given the computational interests
of CFM students, this course will explore concepts using the python programming language. In addition, the course will
explore non-traditional ﬁnance topics such as cryptocurrencies and their relationship with ﬁnance. At the conclusion of the
course, students will have a broad overview of ﬁnance topics. Students will dive deeper into many of the topics in AFM 272.
In addition, students will be able to locate, manipulate, and visualize ﬁnancial data using multiple freely available sources and
the most widely used data analytics libraries within python.
Tentative Class Schedule
Class
Subject
Chapter Readings
1-2
Course introduction and The Capital Market
Chapter 1
2-3
The Canadian Securities Industry
Chapter 2
4-5
Common and Preferred Securities
Chapter 8
6-9
Equities Securities and Equity Trading
Chapter 9
10-11
Time Value of Money
No assigned reading
12
Fixed Income Securities Features and Types
Chapter 6
13-14
Fixed Income Securities Pricing and Trading
Chapter 7
15-16
Portfolio Approach
Chapter 15
17-18
Derivatives
Chapter 10
19-20
Money, Blockchain, and Cryptocurrencies
No assigned reading
21
Canadian Taxation
Chapter 25
22
Team Competition Results and Course Wrap-up
No assigned reading
Please note: the timing of each chapter may not be exact. Please bring notes for one class ahead in case we progress faster than
anticipated.

